add: Kafka-native ACLs (#580)
aiven/aiven-docs: docs/products/kafka/concepts/acl.md

---
title: Access Control Lists in Aiven for Apache Kafka®
sidebar_label: Access control lists
---

Access Control Lists (ACLs) in Aiven for Apache Kafka® manage access to topics, consumer groups, clusters, and Schema Registry with permissions.

Aiven supports two ACL models:

- **Aiven ACLs**: Simplified topic-level access control with basic permissions and
  wildcard support.
- **Kafka-native ACLs**: Advanced resource-level access control with fine-grained
  permissions, including `ALLOW` and `DENY` rules.

## Aiven ACL capabilities

Aiven ACLs provide a simpler way to manage access to Apache Kafka topics and Schema
Registry resources. It is ideal for use cases requiring basic permissions and wildcard
support.

- **Permissions**: Allow `read`, `write`, `readwrite`, or `admin` permissions to be
  assigned to specific users or groups at the topic level.
- **Wildcard support**: Simplifies access control by allowing patterns for usernames
  and resource names, such as `logs-*` for topics or `user?` for usernames.

> - **User-specific or group-level permissions**: Provides precise access control by
>   applying permissions to specific users or groups. For instance, `username: analyst*`
>   applies to all usernames starting with "analyst."

Reviewer: Same as above, this explains "group-level" permission but as there are no groups as separate entities I think it should be some other term here. The matching example is a good one here.
```suggestion
- **User-specific permissions**: Provides precise access control by
  applying permissions to matching users. For instance, `analyst*`
  applies to all usernames starting with "analyst".
```

But maybe full stop should be outside quotes for technical exactness even if grammatically it could go inside quotes?

My suggestions are just something to consider, not sure how it is really best explained

:::note
By default, a user named `avnadmin` is created with `admin` permissions for all
topics. If you are using the Aiven Terraform Provider and want to prevent this behavior,
set `default_acl: false` in your resource configuration.
:::

### ACL Structure

An Aiven ACL entry consists of the following elements:

- **Username**: The Aiven for Apache Kafka service username or a wildcard pattern.
- **Permission**: One of `read`, `write`, `readwrite`, or `admin`.
- **Associated topics**: Specific Kafka topics or wildcard patterns.

Aiven checks ACL entries and grants access if there's a match. If no entry matches,
access is denied. The order of ACL entries does not
influence access evaluation.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add here a note that Aiven ACL also gives implicitly access to all consumer groups?

Author: Added a note.

- Wildcard-based access:

  ```plaintext
  username: analyst*
  permission: read
  topic: xyz
  ```

  Grants all users with usernames starting with `analyst` read access to the topic `xyz`.

- Wildcard in topics:

  ```plaintext
  username: developer*
  permission: read
  topic: test*
  ```

  Grants all users with usernames starting with `developer` read access to topics
  starting with `test`.

## Kafka-native ACL capabilities

Kafka-native ACLs provide granular, resource-level permissions for precise access
control. They enable the management of Apache Kafka topics and additional resources
like clusters, consumer groups, and transactional IDs. It is ideal for
advanced scenarios requiring fine-tuned access management.

- **Fine-grained permissions**: Allow both `ALLOW` and `DENY` rules to provide
  precise control over access.
- **Expanded resource-level control**: Manage access to non-topic resources,
  such as consumer groups, clusters, and transactional IDs.
- **Pattern-based matching**: Specify how resource names are matched using `LITERAL`
  for exact matches or `PREFIXED` for prefixes.

### ACL structure

A Kafka-native ACL entry consists of the following elements:

> - **Principal**: Specifies the user or service account, such as `User:Alice`.

Reviewer: One can use wildcards here, e.g. `User:alice*` for all usernames starting with `alice`. Also only `User:` is supported for now. Not sure how to explain those...

Author: Thanks, I updated the text here.

- **Host**: Defines the allowed host. Use `*` to allow all hosts.
- **Resource type**: Indicates the Apache Kafka resource to control, such as `Topic`,
  `Group`, `Cluster`, or `TransactionalId`.
- **Pattern type**: Determines how the resource value is matched:
  - **LITERAL**: Matches an exact resource name, such as `my-topic`.
  - **PREFIXED**: Matches all resources sharing a specified prefix, such as `logs-*`.

> - **Resource**: Refers to the specific Kafka resource. Its value depends on the selected pattern type.

Reviewer: There is also pattern type = LITERAL + resource = `*` which as s special case matches everything. That should be documented somewhere. It is standard Kafka convention though.

Author: This a note to clarify this.

|                      | `DescribeConfigs`       | [docs](https://kafka.apache.org/30/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/clients/admin/Admin.html#describeConfigs(java.util.Map))         | ✓         |                          |             |             |                | ✓                    |
|                      | `AlterConfigs`          | [docs](https://kafka.apache.org/30/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/clients/admin/Admin.html#alterConfigs(java.util.Map))           | ✓         |                          |             |             |                | ✓                    |
|                      | `Delete`                | [docs](https://kafka.apache.org/30/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/clients/admin/Admin.html#deleteTopics(java.util.Collection))     | ✓         |                          |             |             | ✓              | ✓                    |
|  TransactionalId   | `DescribeTransactions`  | [docs](https://kafka.apache.org/30/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/clients/admin/Admin.html#describeTransactions(java.util.Collection)) | ✓         |                          | ✓           |             |                | ✓                    |

> |                      | `BeginTransaction`      | [docs](https://kafka.apache.org/30/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/clients/producer/KafkaProducer.html#beginTransaction())         | ✓         |                          | ✓           |             |                | ✓                    |

Reviewer: Honestly I don't understand this table anymore. Old one tried to explain what Kafka opertions are allowed by different Aiven ACL rules. Columns Aiven ACLs and Kafka-native ACLs do not make sense to me in this context.

Author: Thanks. I reverted the table to the previous one.

---
title: Access Control Lists in Aiven for Apache Kafka®
sidebar_label: Access control lists
---

Access Control Lists (ACLs) in Aiven for Apache Kafka® manage access to topics, consumer groups, clusters, and Schema Registry with permissions.

Aiven supports two ACL models:

- **Aiven ACLs**: Simplified topic-level access control with basic permissions and
  wildcard support.
- **Kafka-native ACLs**: Advanced resource-level access control with fine-grained
  permissions, including `ALLOW` and `DENY` rules.

## Aiven ACL capabilities

Aiven ACLs provide a simpler way to manage access to Apache Kafka topics and Schema
Registry resources. It is ideal for use cases requiring basic permissions and wildcard
support.

- **Permissions**: Allow `read`, `write`, `readwrite`, or `admin` permissions to be

>   assigned to specific users or groups at the topic level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  assigned to specific users at the topic level.
```

We do not have user groups as separate entities. However it is possible to use wildcards also with users to apply same ACL rule for many users by matching, which is explained there later on.
